= Model-manager
== Purpose
Rails app that uses rake task to produce MaxEnt models from species occurrence data hosted on the REBIOMA data portal:
link:http://data.rebioma.net

== Model specification
One of the key features of the REBIOMA web portal is its support of species distribution models, created from taxonomically valid and quality reviewed occurrence data. Additional details are in {this document}[link:https://docs.google.com/file/d/0B0olImFXGNMnNWZkZDdmMTAtNTM4NC00ZGE0LTg5NmUtZGMyM2FiNzBlMzE2/edit?usp=sharing]. This is a working document that shows details of the first implementation of the modeling routines, and includes modeling features that have been implemented in REBIOMA, and features that have not yet been implemented. The latest version has been updated to create models from IPCC 4th assessment GCM data.

To summarize, species distribution models are produced only from valid, quality reviewed occurrence records. We use MaxEnt[link:http://www.cs.princeton.edu/~schapire/maxent/] to produce continuous distribution models from the occurrence records and environmental data for several eras and scenarios: present (1950-2000), and future (2080-2100 under a2a and b2a future climate "story-lines"). In constructing training data, we correct for both sample and era bias. The models are trained, and results are subjected to statistical validation. Only models that pass this validation step are projected to the eras and scenarios listed above. 

The main steps in the modeling process are as follows:
1. Setup. From all occurrences, select species with at least 8 reliably reviewed, non-duplicate records. For each species occurrence, extract and save appropriate climate and forest cover values. Create background sample files for each species scenario consisting of 10,000 points, with the following constraints: Select 10,000 points randomly from within sampled cells (i.e. a “mask” of all sampled cells for all species) to correct for spatial sampling bias. Selecting background data in the same proportion per era as it was collected to correct for temporal sample bias.

2. Model training. The next step is to run Maxent with replicates. We do not project the models at this stage. Run either 4 or 10 replicates to evaluate model depending on the total number of samples. If total samples are > 8 but < 20, run 4 replicates. If samples are >= 20, run 10 replicates. For every species, we now have two potential models, one including climate and forest cover variables, one with climate only.

3. Model evaluation. For a given species, if the mean training AUC minus standard error (SE) > 0.5 (for the 4 or 10 models produced by cross validation), then we produce (“project”) the full models using all the samples. 

4. Produce full models. If the species passes validation, then produce the model using 100% of the data (no cross-validation). This step produces the lambdas that we will use in projection.

5. Full set of models to project. For each model, select the correct “lambda” scenario, and project onto the matching environmental layers present (1950-2000) and future climate (2080-2100) for a2a and b2a scenarios. 

For each species this results in three distribution projections: 
- Present climate and forest cover
- Future under a2a scenario and predicted deforestation
- Future under b2a scenario and predicted deforestation

== Notes on the code here

Unfortunately this is not general purpose code, it is highly customized to our purposes and platform for production in this one particular application. Over time, we will try to make this more organized and generic so that it is more easily applicable elsewhere. 

== Installation

1. At the command prompt, create a new Rails application:
       <tt>rails new myapp</tt> (where <tt>myapp</tt> is the application name)

2. Change directory to <tt>myapp</tt> and start the web server:
       <tt>cd myapp; rails server</tt> (run with --help for options)

3. Go to http://localhost:3000/ and you'll see:
       "Welcome aboard: You're riding Ruby on Rails!"

4. Follow the guidelines to start developing your application. You can find
the following resources handy:

* The Getting Started Guide: http://guides.rubyonrails.org/getting_started.html
* Ruby on Rails Tutorial Book: http://www.railstutorial.org/


== Debugging Rails

Sometimes your application goes wrong. Fortunately there are a lot of tools that
will help you debug it and get it back on the rails.

First area to check is the application log files. Have "tail -f" commands
running on the server.log and development.log. Rails will automatically display
debugging and runtime information to these files. Debugging info will also be
shown in the browser on requests from 127.0.0.1.

You can also log your own messages directly into the log file from your code
using the Ruby logger class from inside your controllers. Example:

  class WeblogController < ActionController::Base
    def destroy
      @weblog = Weblog.find(params[:id])
      @weblog.destroy
      logger.info("#{Time.now} Destroyed Weblog ID ##{@weblog.id}!")
    end
  end

The result will be a message in your log file along the lines of:

  Mon Oct 08 14:22:29 +1000 2007 Destroyed Weblog ID #1!

More information on how to use the logger is at http://www.ruby-doc.org/core/

Also, Ruby documentation can be found at http://www.ruby-lang.org/. There are
several books available online as well:

* Programming Ruby: http://www.ruby-doc.org/docs/ProgrammingRuby/ (Pickaxe)
* Learn to Program: http://pine.fm/LearnToProgram/ (a beginners guide)

These two books will bring you up to speed on the Ruby language and also on
programming in general.


== Debugger

Debugger support is available through the debugger command when you start your
Mongrel or WEBrick server with --debugger. This means that you can break out of
execution at any point in the code, investigate and change the model, and then,
resume execution! You need to install ruby-debug to run the server in debugging
mode. With gems, use <tt>sudo gem install ruby-debug</tt>. Example:

  class WeblogController < ActionController::Base
    def index
      @posts = Post.all
      debugger
    end
  end

So the controller will accept the action, run the first line, then present you
with a IRB prompt in the server window. Here you can do things like:

  >> @posts.inspect
  => "[#<Post:0x14a6be8
          @attributes={"title"=>nil, "body"=>nil, "id"=>"1"}>,
       #<Post:0x14a6620
          @attributes={"title"=>"Rails", "body"=>"Only ten..", "id"=>"2"}>]"
  >> @posts.first.title = "hello from a debugger"
  => "hello from a debugger"

...and even better, you can examine how your runtime objects actually work:

  >> f = @posts.first
  => #<Post:0x13630c4 @attributes={"title"=>nil, "body"=>nil, "id"=>"1"}>
  >> f.
  Display all 152 possibilities? (y or n)

Finally, when you're ready to resume execution, you can enter "cont".


== Console

The console is a Ruby shell, which allows you to interact with your
application's domain model. Here you'll have all parts of the application
configured, just like it is when the application is running. You can inspect
domain models, change values, and save to the database. Starting the script
without arguments will launch it in the development environment.

To start the console, run <tt>rails console</tt> from the application
directory.

Options:

* Passing the <tt>-s, --sandbox</tt> argument will rollback any modifications
  made to the database.
* Passing an environment name as an argument will load the corresponding
  environment. Example: <tt>rails console production</tt>.

To reload your controllers and models after launching the console run
<tt>reload!</tt>

More information about irb can be found at:
link:http://www.rubycentral.org/pickaxe/irb.html


== dbconsole

You can go to the command line of your database directly through <tt>rails
dbconsole</tt>. You would be connected to the database with the credentials
defined in database.yml. Starting the script without arguments will connect you
to the development database. Passing an argument will connect you to a different
database, like <tt>rails dbconsole production</tt>. Currently works for MySQL,
PostgreSQL and SQLite 3.

== Description of Contents

The default directory structure of a generated Ruby on Rails application:

  |-- app
  |   |-- assets
  |       |-- images
  |       |-- javascripts
  |       `-- stylesheets
  |   |-- controllers
  |   |-- helpers
  |   |-- mailers
  |   |-- models
  |   `-- views
  |       `-- layouts
  |-- config
  |   |-- environments
  |   |-- initializers
  |   `-- locales
  |-- db
  |-- doc
  |-- lib
  |   `-- tasks
  |-- log
  |-- public
  |-- script
  |-- test
  |   |-- fixtures
  |   |-- functional
  |   |-- integration
  |   |-- performance
  |   `-- unit
  |-- tmp
  |   |-- cache
  |   |-- pids
  |   |-- sessions
  |   `-- sockets
  `-- vendor
      |-- assets
          `-- stylesheets
      `-- plugins

app
  Holds all the code that's specific to this particular application.

app/assets
  Contains subdirectories for images, stylesheets, and JavaScript files.

app/controllers
  Holds controllers that should be named like weblogs_controller.rb for
  automated URL mapping. All controllers should descend from
  ApplicationController which itself descends from ActionController::Base.

app/models
  Holds models that should be named like post.rb. Models descend from
  ActiveRecord::Base by default.

app/views
  Holds the template files for the view that should be named like
  weblogs/index.html.erb for the WeblogsController#index action. All views use
  eRuby syntax by default.

app/views/layouts
  Holds the template files for layouts to be used with views. This models the
  common header/footer method of wrapping views. In your views, define a layout
  using the <tt>layout :default</tt> and create a file named default.html.erb.
  Inside default.html.erb, call <% yield %> to render the view using this
  layout.

app/helpers
  Holds view helpers that should be named like weblogs_helper.rb. These are
  generated for you automatically when using generators for controllers.
  Helpers can be used to wrap functionality for your views into methods.

config
  Configuration files for the Rails environment, the routing map, the database,
  and other dependencies.

db
  Contains the database schema in schema.rb. db/migrate contains all the
  sequence of Migrations for your schema.

doc
  This directory is where your application documentation will be stored when
  generated using <tt>rake doc:app</tt>

lib
  Application specific libraries. Basically, any kind of custom code that
  doesn't belong under controllers, models, or helpers. This directory is in
  the load path.

public
  The directory available for the web server. Also contains the dispatchers and the
  default HTML files. This should be set as the DOCUMENT_ROOT of your web
  server.

script
  Helper scripts for automation and generation.

test
  Unit and functional tests along with fixtures. When using the rails generate
  command, template test files will be generated for you and placed in this
  directory.

vendor
  External libraries that the application depends on. Also includes the plugins
  subdirectory. If the app has frozen rails, those gems also go here, under
  vendor/rails/. This directory is in the load path.
